# Abortion

Source: https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/abortion


# Abortion

There are two ways of ending a pregnancy: in-clinic abortion and the abortion pill. Both are safe and very common. If you’re pregnant and thinking about abortion, you may have lots of questions. We’re here to help.


## Abortion Clinics Near You

View Planned Parenthood health centers that provide abortion care and get the information you need to schedule an appointment.

Your information is private and anonymous.


## You need an abortion. What now?

Check out our step-by-step checklist here.


## Get The Facts About Abortion


### Considering Abortion

Trying to decide if abortion is the right choice for you? Here are answers to common questions.


### The Abortion Pill

The abortion pill works up to 11 weeks of pregnancy. You can usually have your abortion in the privacy of your own home.


### In-Clinic Abortion

In-clinic abortions are safe, simple medical procedures provided by doctors and nurses at a health center.


## You Can Come to Us, No Matter What

Pregnant and not sure what to do? That can be scary, but you’re not alone. The professional, caring staff at your nearest Planned Parenthood health center will give you all the straight-up information you need to help you make the right decision for you. No pressure, no judgment. Just support.


## Find a Health Center


## Just a couple more questions.

For more accurate abortion options, please enter your age and the first day of your last period. Your information is private and anonymous.


## Questions About Parental Consent for Abortion?


## Do you want to talk to someone about your medication abortion?

Educators at Aya Contigo, a chat service designed to provide emotional support to people about medication abortions, are available in real time to provide information when you need it.  10am-10pm EST (only available in the US).

*This link takes you away from the Planned Parenthood site. Planned Parenthood is not responsible for nor does it endorse any legal, medical, or other advice or information provided by any of the entities identified or referenced herein or by any other third parties, whether referenced herein or not.


## Should I Take a Pregnancy Test?

Learn about the signs of pregnancy, pregnancy tests, and more.


## Book an Appointment


## Just a couple more questions.

For more accurate abortion options, please enter your age and the first day of your last period. Your information is private and anonymous.

