# Cervical Cap

Source: https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/birth-control/cervical-cap


# Cervical Cap


- Cervical Cap
- How effective are cervical caps?
- How do I use a cervical cap?
- How do I get a cervical cap?

- How safe are cervical caps?
- What are the benefits of cervical caps?
- What are the disadvantages of using cervical caps?

## What is a cervical cap?

A cervical cap is a little cup made from soft silicone and shaped like a sailor's hat. You put it deep inside your vagina to cover your cervix.

The type of cervical cap that you can get in the U.S. is called FemCap®.


## How do cervical caps work?

The cervical cap covers your cervix, stopping sperm from joining an egg. In order for a cervical cap to work best, it must be used with spermicide (a cream or gel that kills sperm).


## How do cervical caps work with spermicide to prevent pregnancy?

Adding spermicide to your cervical cap before you put it in your vagina makes it much more effective. Spermicide has chemicals that kill sperm so they can't get to an egg. The cervical cap keeps the spermicide in place, near your cervix.


## What’s the difference between cervical caps and diaphragms?

Cervical caps are smaller than diaphragms and the shape is a little different: diaphragms are shaped like a dish, and cervical caps look like a sailor’s hat. They both work with spermicide and cover your cervix to prevent pregnancy.

You can leave the cervical cap in longer than a diaphragm (up to 2 days), but diaphragms are slightly more effective at preventing pregnancy. Your nurse or doctor can help you decide which one is better for you.


- Yes
- No
Help us improve - how could this information be more helpful?

How did this information help you?

Please don't check this box if you are a human.


### Cervical Cap


- 71-86% effective
71-86% effective

- Costs up to $90, but can be $0
Costs up to $90, but can be $0

- Prescription required
Prescription required

- Put it in before sex
Put it in before sex

