# Chlamydia

Source: https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/stds-hiv-safer-sex/chlamydia


# Chlamydia


- Chlamydia
- What are chlamydia symptoms?
- Should I get tested for chlamydia?

- How do I get treated for chlamydia?
- How is chlamydia prevented?

## What is Chlamydia?

Chlamydia is a bacterial infection that’s easily cured with antibiotic medicine. It’s one of the most common STDs, and most people who have chlamydia don’t show any symptoms.


### Want to get tested for chlamydia?


## Just a couple more questions.

For more accurate abortion options, please enter your age and the first day of your last period. Your information is private and anonymous.


## Chlamydia is really common.

Chlamydia is a SUPER common bacterial infection that you can get from sexual contact with another person. Close to 3 million Americans get it every year, most commonly among 14- to 24-year-olds.

Chlamydia is spread through vaginal, anal, and oral sex. The infection is carried in semen (cum), pre-cum, and vaginal fluids. Chlamydia can infect the penis, vagina, cervix, anus, urethra, eyes, and throat. Most people with chlamydia don’t have any symptoms and feel totally fine, so they might not even know they’re infected.

Chlamydia can be easily cleared up with antibiotics. But if you don’t treat chlamydia, it may lead to major health problems in the future. That’s why STD testing is so important — the sooner you know you have chlamydia, the faster you can cure it. You can prevent chlamydia by using condoms every time you have sex.


## How do you get chlamydia?

Chlamydia is usually spread during sexual contact with someone who has the infection. It can happen even if no one cums. The main ways people get chlamydia are from having vaginal sex and anal sex, but it can also be spread through oral sex.

Rarely, you can get chlamydia by touching your eye if you have infected fluids on your hand. Chlamydia can also be spread to a baby during birth if the mother has it.

Chlamydia isn’t spread through casual contact, so you CAN’T get chlamydia from sharing food or drinks, kissing, hugging, holding hands, coughing, sneezing, or sitting on the toilet.

Using condoms and/or dental dams every time you have sex is the best way to help prevent chlamydia.


## More questions from patients:

You can get chlamydia by having vaginal, anal, or oral sex with someone who has it. Oral chlamydia is much less common than genital chlamydia.

If you get oral chlamydia, you might have some soreness and redness in your throat or mouth. Most people with oral chlamydia don’t have any symptoms — that’s why it’s so important to get tested for STDs regularly.

If you do notice any symptoms, if your partner has been diagnosed with chlamydia or another STD, or if your partner has symptoms, check in with your doctor or nurse or contact your local Planned Parenthood health center.


- Yes
- No
Help us improve - how could this information be more helpful?

How did this information help you?

Please don't check this box if you are a human.

