# IUD

Source: https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/birth-control/iud


# IUD


- IUD
- How effective are IUDs?
- How can I get an IUD?
- What's an IUD insertion like?
- Are there IUD side effects?
- How safe are IUDs?

- What are the benefits of IUDs?
- What are the disadvantages of IUDs?
- How does IUD removal work?
- What are hormonal IUDs?
- What are non-hormonal IUDs?
"IUD" stands for intrauterine device, and it's one of the most effective kinds of birth control you can get.

Watch in ASL


## What’s an IUD?

An IUD is a tiny device that's put into your uterus to prevent pregnancy. It’s long-term, reversible, and one of the most effective birth control methods out there.


### Want an IUD?


## Just a couple more questions.

For more accurate abortion options, please enter your age and the first day of your last period. Your information is private and anonymous.


## What does IUD stand for?

IUD stands for Intrauterine Device (basically: a device inside your uterus). It's a small piece of flexible plastic shaped like a T. Sometimes it’s called an IUC — intrauterine contraception.


## What are the types of IUDs?

There are 5 different brands of IUDs that are FDA approved for use in the United States:


- Paragard
- Mirena
- Kyleena
- Liletta
- Skyla
These IUDs are divided into 2 types:


- hormonal IUDs (Mirena, Kyleena, Liletta, and Skyla).
- copper IUDs (Paragard) and
The Paragard IUD doesn’t have hormones. It’s wrapped in a tiny bit of copper, and it protects you from pregnancy for up to 12 years.

The Mirena, Kyleena, Liletta, and Skyla IUDs use the hormone progestin to prevent pregnancy. Progestin is very similar to the hormone progesterone that our bodies make naturally. Mirena works for up to 8 years. Kyleena works for up to 5 years. Liletta works for up to 8 years. Skyla works for up to 3 years.


## How do IUDs work?

Both copper IUDs and hormonal IUDs prevent pregnancy by changing the way sperm cells move so they can't get to an egg. If sperm can’t make it to an egg, pregnancy can’t happen.

The Paragard IUD uses copper to prevent pregnancy. Sperm doesn’t like copper, so the Paragard IUD makes it almost impossible for sperm to get to that egg.

The hormones in the Mirena, Kyleena, Liletta, and Skyla IUDs prevent pregnancy in two ways: 1) they thicken the mucus that lives on the cervix, which blocks and traps the sperm, and 2) the hormones also sometimes stop eggs from leaving your ovaries (called ovulation), which means there’s no egg for a sperm to fertilize. No egg, no pregnancy.

One of the awesome things about IUDs is that they last for years — but they’re not permanent. If you decide to get pregnant or you just don’t want to have your IUD anymore, your nurse or doctor can quickly and easily take it out. You’re able to get pregnant right after the IUD is removed.


## Can IUDs be used as emergency contraception?

Yes! The Paragard, Mirena, and Liletta IUDs work super well as emergency contraception. If you get one of these IUDs put in within 120 hours (5 days) after unprotected sex, it’s more than 99% effective. It’s actually the most effective way to prevent pregnancy after sex.

Another great thing about using an IUD as emergency contraception: you can keep it and have really effective birth control that you can use for up to 8 to12 years (depending on which kind you get). The other kind of emergency contraception is the morning-after pill. You can take it up to 5 days after unprotected sex to reduce the risk of pregnancy.


- Yes
- No
Help us improve - how could this information be more helpful?

How did this information help you?

Please don't check this box if you are a human.


### IUD


- 99% effective
99% effective

- Costs up to $1,800, but can be $0.
Costs up to $1,800, but can be $0.

- Put in by a doctor or nurse
Put in by a doctor or nurse

- Lasts up to 12 years
Lasts up to 12 years

